feat: add lambda-extensions article (#3)
CorentinDoue/articles: blog-posts/lambda-extensions/readme.md

---
published: false
title: 'Power up your serverless application with AWS Lambda extensions'
cover_image: 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CorentinDoue/articles/master/blog-posts/lambda-extensions/assets/cov.jpg'
description: 'Implementation guide for AWS lambda extensions with NodeJs and Typescript'
tags: aws, serverless, lambda, extensions
series:
canonical_url:
---

> The AWS Lambda service has some killer features that you probably don't know about. One of them is the ability to run additional code alongside the handler code. This feature is called [extensions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-extensions.html).

Reviewer: AWS Lambda service comes packed with impressive features that might still be new to you. One such feature allows the running of supplementary code concurrently with the handler code, known as [extensions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-extensions.html).

In this article, we'll delve into the process of using these extensions to create a personalized monitoring tool for lambdas without compromising their performance. The setup we'll use involves a NodeJs Lambda deployed with AWS CDK.

⚡ Delving into the Lambda Extension Feature
Let's begin with a brief overview of the Lambda extension. If you're already acquainted with this feature, feel free to skip ahead to the creation section.

🤔 What is a Lambda Extension?
A Lambda extension is a snippet of code executed in the same environment as the lambda handler. It can be:

Internal: This runs within the same process as the handler code.
External: This operates in a separate process.
lambda extensions schema

Regardless of the type, it shares the memory, timeout, and ephemeral storage of the execution environment with the handler.

The Lambda extension can interact with the Lambda service, getting notified about every event received by the handler and receiving telemetry events from the Lambda service.

An internal extension can directly enhance the handler code, given that it operates in the same process. For instance, an internal monitoring extension can supersede the HTTP library to intercept and log all HTTP calls.

Conversely, because an external extension operates in a separate process, it can enhance the handler without affecting its performance. For instance, an external monitoring extension can transmit metrics to an external monitoring service once the handler has responded, thereby avoiding any negative impact on API performance.

🧩 How to Implement a Lambda Extension
A Lambda extension is delivered in the form of a [Lambda layer](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/gettingstarted-concepts.html#gettingstarted-concepts-layer).

To integrate an external extension, you simply need to append the layer to your lambda. The extension process will then initiate automatically.

For an internal extension, while you still need to add the layer to your lambda, you'll also need to adjust the runtime to run the extension's entry point alongside the handler. This adjustment is accomplished via [runtime specific environment variables or wrapper scripts](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-modify.html).

For instance, in NodeJs, you can set the NODE_OPTIONS environment variable to --require /opt/my-extension.js or configure the AWS_LAMBDA_EXEC_WRAPPER environment variable to the path of a wrapper script.

  }
}
```

Then we need to ship the code to the lambda thanks to a lambda layer.

💡 By outputting the build of the monitor code in the same folder as the interceptor code (`./dist/layers/interceptorExtension`), the layer will ship both files without changing our CDK configuration.

Finally, we need to make the lambda execute the monitor process.

By default, the lambda service will try to execute all files in the `/opt/extensions` folder when starting the lambda environment.

So let's add a bash script into `./dist/layers/monitorExtension/extensions` to start the monitor code.

```bash
# dist/layers/monitorExtension/extensions/monitor

#!/bin/bash
set -euo pipefail

OWN_FILENAME="$(basename $0)"
LAMBDA_EXTENSION_NAME="$OWN_FILENAME" # (external) extension name has to match the filename
NODE_OPTIONS="" # Needed to reset NODE_OPTIONS set by Lambda runtime. Otherwise, the internal interceptor extension will be loaded in the external process too.

exec "/opt/${LAMBDA_EXTENSION_NAME}.js"
```

> This script will be shipped to `/opt/extensions/monitor` and will be executed automatically by the lambda service.

Reviewer: This script will be delivered to /opt/extensions/monitor and will automatically be executed by the Lambda service.

💡Take note that the environment variables of the Lambda are shared across processes. Consequently, the external process will have NODE_OPTIONS set to require the interceptor code. It's crucial to reset NODE_OPTIONS to avoid loading the interceptor code twice, which would inadvertently intercept the monitor calls.

With that, we've successfully created our monitoring extension.

👀 Results
Now, let's redeploy it on our previous Lambda. Here are the final logs:

monitored lambda execution logs

🟠 The Lambda service initializes the Lambda execution environment.
🟢 The external monitoring extension kicks into action.
🟣 The internal interceptor extension comes to life.
🟠 The Lambda service confirms the successful initialization of the monitoring extension.
🟠 The Lambda service commences the first event handling.
🟣 The internal interceptor extension intercepts the two HTTP calls.
🟠 The Lambda service concludes the first event handling.
🟠 The Lambda service launches the second event handling.
🟢 The external monitoring extension dispatches the logs of the first event to the external monitoring service.
🟣 The internal interceptor extension intercepts the two HTTP calls again.
🟠 The Lambda service wraps up the first event handling.
🟢 Upon Lambda shutdown, the external monitoring extension dispatches the logs of the second event to the external monitoring service.
On the faux external monitoring service, we've received event-specific, aggregated logs 🥳:

forwarded logs

⏭️ Trial it on your own AWS account by using the dedicated repository:

{% embed https://github.com/CorentinDoue/lambda-extensions-example %}

Conclusion
You now understand how to create both internal and external extensions for Lambda. This method provides a robust way to build and distribute support tools for your Lambdas without influencing their performance or altering the handler code crafted by other developers.

I encourage you to share your insights and inquiries in the comments section below. I'll be more than happy to respond.

---
published: false
title: 'Power up your serverless application with AWS Lambda extensions'
cover_image: 'https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CorentinDoue/articles/master/blog-posts/lambda-extensions/assets/cov.jpg'
description: 'Implementation guide for AWS lambda extensions with NodeJs and Typescript'
tags: aws, serverless, lambda, extensions
series:
canonical_url:
---

> The AWS Lambda service has some killer features that you probably don't know. One of them is the ability to run additional code alongside the handler code. This feature is called [extensions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-extensions.html).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The AWS Lambda service has some killer features that you probably don't know about. One of them is the ability to run additional code alongside the handler code. This feature is called [extensions](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/lambda-extensions.html).
```

> This article explains how to create your own monitoring tool with internal and external extensions and how to use it to monitor your lambdas without degrading its performances. The implementation uses NodeJs Lambda deployed with AWS CDK.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article teaches you how to use extensions in order to create your own monitoring tool for lambdas without degrading their performances. The implementation uses NodeJs Lambda deployed with AWS CDK.
```

Reviewer 2: Dans l'ordre je trouve ça mieux de mettre en avant que tu parles des extensions à travaers un exemple.

Because it runs in a separate process, an **external extension** can add capabilities to the handler without impacting its performance.

For example, an external monitoring extension can send metrics to an external monitoring service after the handler has returned its response to avoid degrading an API performance.

### 🧩 How to use a Lambda extension

A Lambda extension comes as a [**Lambda layer**](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/gettingstarted-concepts.html#gettingstarted-concepts-layer).

To add an **external extension**, you only need to add the layer to your lambda. The extension process will be spawn automatically.

To add an **internal extension**, you need to add the layer to your lambda but you also have to configure the runtime to execute the entrypoint of the extension alongside with the handler. This configuration is done using [runtime specific environment variable](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-modify.html).

For example, for NodeJs, you need to set the `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable to `--require /opt/my-extension.js`.

## ⚙️ How to create an extension

> Let's create a monitoring extension that logs all http calls made by the lambda and send them to a external service for storage and visualisation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's create a monitoring extension that logs all http calls made by the lambda and send them to an external service for storage and visualisation.
```

```json
{
  "scripts": {
    "build:interceptor": "./node_modules/.bin/esbuild  ./src/layers/monitorExtension/interceptor.ts --bundle --outfile='./dist/layers/monitorExtension/interceptor.js' --platform=node --main-fields=module,main"
  }
}
```

Then we need to ship the code to the lambda thanks to a lambda layer.

With CDK, we can use the `LambdaLayerVersion` construct to create a layer which will ship all the content of a directory into the `/opt` folder of the lambda.

```ts
// lib/partial-stack.ts

export class AppStack extends Stack {
  constructor(scope: Construct, id: string, props?: StackProps) {
    super(scope, id, props);

    const layer = new LayerVersion(scope, 'MonitorLayer', {
      code: Code.fromAsset('dist/layers/monitorExtension'),
    });

    const helloFunction = new NodejsFunction(this, 'Hello', {
      runtime: Runtime.NODEJS_18_X,
      handler: 'handler',
      entry: path.join(__dirname, `/../src/functions/hello/handler.ts`),
      layers: [layer],
    });
  }
}
```

Finally, we need to configure the lambda to execute the interceptor code alongside the handler code.

> For that we need to use runtime specific environment variables. For NodeJs we need to set the `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable to `--require /opt/interceptor.js`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are runtime specific environment variables to do so. For NodeJs runtime, just set the `NODE_OPTIONS` environment variable to `--require /opt/interceptor.js`. This path is the entry point of the internal extension.
```

    });

    const helloFunction = new NodejsFunction(this, 'Hello', {
      runtime: Runtime.NODEJS_18_X,
      handler: 'handler',
      entry: path.join(__dirname, `/../src/functions/hello/handler.ts`),
      layers: [layer],
      environment: {
        NODE_OPTIONS: '--require /opt/interceptor.js',
      },
    });
  }
}
```

That's it! We have created our internal extension.

#### 👀 Results

Lets deploy it on a simple lambda, that make http calls:

```ts
// src/functions/hello/handler.ts

import fetch from 'node-fetch';

export const hello = async () => {
  await fetch('https://webhook.site/87c3df17-c965-40d9-a616-790c4002a162');

  await fetch('https://webhook.site/87c3df17-c965-40d9-a616-790c4002a162', {
    method: 'POST',
    body: JSON.stringify({
      message: 'hello world',
    }),
  });

  return {
    statusCode: 200,
    headers: { 'Content-Type': 'application/json' },
    body: JSON.stringify({
      message: 'OK',
    }),
  };
};

export const handler = hello;
```

We can see those logs:

![intercepted lambda execution logs](./assets/internal-interceptor-logs.jpeg)

The interceptor code ran alongside the handler code and intercepted the http calls 🚀.

> But we can see that it fails to forward them to the local http server. Let's create the external extension to fix that.

Reviewer 2: C'est dommage, là on sait que le call fail mais on ne voit pas tout le log et tu n'explicites pas l'erreur.
Ca peut être pas mal d'avoir un log avec toute l'erreur et d'expliquer pourquoi on a cette erreur.

Reviewer 2: En gros dire que le serveur qui est censé recevoir le log n'existe pas donc normal qu'on ait une erreur là

### 📊 The monitoring external extension

We want to aggregate the logs and send them to an external service without impacting the lambda performance. So we will use an external process, aka an external extension, to handle those logs.

#### 📝 The external extension code

First, we want our external process to be aware of whats happening in the lambda. To do so, we can use the [lambda extension API](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/runtimes-extensions-api.html) to:

1. register the process as an extension
2. subscribe to various lambda events or telemetry events

If you're not familiar with the lambda extension API, I recommend you to read the wonderful article [Simplifying internal AWS Lambda APIs](https://danwakeem.medium.com/simplifying-internal-aws-lambda-apis-25a26ab9070e) of Wakeem's World.

> I publish a node package inspired by his article to abstract the communication with the lambda extension API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I published a node package inspired by his article to abstract the communication with the lambda extension API.
```

1. 🟠 The lambda service inits the lambda execution environment
2. 🟢 The monitoring external extension initializes
3. 🟣 The interceptor internal extension initializes
4. 🟠 The lambda service acknowledges the initialization of the monitoring extension
5. 🟠 The lambda service starts the first event handling
6. 🟣 The interceptor internal extension intercepts the two http calls
7. 🟠 The lambda service ends the first event handling
8. 🟠 The lambda service starts the second event handling
9. 🟢 The monitoring external extension sends the logs of the first event to the external monitoring service
10. 🟣 The interceptor internal extension intercepts the two http calls
11. 🟠 The lambda service ends the first event handling
12. 🟢 At lambda shutdown, the monitoring external extension sends the logs of the second event to the external monitoring service

On the fake external monitoring service, we received aggregated logs by event 🥳:

![forwarded logs](./assets/log-results.jpeg)

⏭️ Test it on your own AWS account using the dedicated repository:

{% embed https://github.com/CorentinDoue/lambda-extensions-example %}

## Conclusion

> You now know how to create internal and external extensions for lambda. It's a powerful way to implement and share support tools for your lambdas without impacting their performances and without directly modifying the handler code written by other developers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you know how to create internal and external extensions for lambda. It's a powerful way to implement and share support tools for your lambdas without impacting their performances and without directly modifying the handler code written by other developers.
```
